docs/guides/CHUNK_SIZE_TUNING.md, before:

# Chunk Size Tuning Guide

## Overview

The chunk size determines how much data is encrypted/decrypted in a single AES-GCM operation. This guide helps you choose the optimal chunk size for your use case.

## Default Configuration

**Default Chunk Size:** 1 MB (1048576 bytes)

This default is optimized for general-purpose use and provides a good balance between:
- Memory usage
- CPU efficiency
- File I/O performance
- Progress reporting granularity

## Valid Range

- **Minimum:** 64 KB (65536 bytes)
- **Maximum:** 10 MB (10485760 bytes)

Values must be multiples of 4 KB (4096 bytes) for optimal AES alignment.

## Configuration Methods

### 1. Global Configuration (HCL)

Set the chunk size in your configuration file:

```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "2MB"  # Apply to all operations
}
```

Supported formats:
- `"512KB"` - Kilobytes
- `"2MB"` - Megabytes  
- `"1048576"` - Bytes (no unit)

### 2. CLI Override

Override the configured chunk size for a specific operation:

```bash
# Encrypt with custom chunk size
./file-encryptor encrypt -i large.bin -o large.enc --chunk-size 4MB

# Decrypt uses the chunk size from when the file was encrypted
./file-encryptor decrypt -i large.enc -k large.key -o large.bin
```

**Note:** Decryption automatically reads the chunk size from the encrypted file header, so you don't need to specify it during decryption.

## Performance Characteristics

### Small Chunk Sizes (64KB - 512KB)

**Advantages:**
- Lower memory usage per operation
- More granular progress reporting
- Better for resource-constrained environments
- Faster cancellation response

**Disadvantages:**
- More CPU overhead (more encryption operations)
- More file I/O operations
- Higher metadata overhead
- Slower overall throughput

**Use When:**
- Running on systems with limited RAM
- Processing many files concurrently
- Need responsive progress updates
- Files are typically small (<10MB)

### Medium Chunk Sizes (512KB - 2MB)

**Advantages:**
- Balanced memory/CPU trade-off
- Good throughput for most file sizes
- Reasonable progress granularity
- Minimal overhead

**Disadvantages:**
- Middle-ground trade-offs

**Use When:**
- General-purpose encryption (default)
- Mixed file sizes
- Standard server/workstation hardware
- Balanced requirements

### Large Chunk Sizes (2MB - 10MB)

**Advantages:**
- Maximum throughput for large files
- Fewer encryption operations
- Lower CPU overhead per byte
- Reduced metadata size

**Disadvantages:**
- Higher memory usage per operation
- Less granular progress reporting
- Slower cancellation response
- Larger buffer pool allocation

**Use When:**
- Processing very large files (>100MB)
- High-performance hardware available
- Throughput is critical
- Memory is not constrained
- Sequential processing (not parallel)

## Tuning Recommendations

### By File Size

| Average File Size | Recommended Chunk Size |
|------------------|------------------------|
| < 1 MB           | 256 KB                 |
| 1 MB - 10 MB     | 512 KB - 1 MB (default)|
| 10 MB - 100 MB   | 1 MB - 2 MB            |
| 100 MB - 1 GB    | 2 MB - 4 MB            |
| > 1 GB           | 4 MB - 8 MB            |

### By Use Case

**High-Throughput Batch Processing:**
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "4MB"  # Maximize throughput
}
```

**Real-Time Monitoring (Service Mode):**
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "1MB"  # Balanced default
}
```

**Resource-Constrained Environments:**
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "256KB"  # Minimize memory
}
```

**Docker/Container Deployments:**
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "512KB"  # Balance memory limits
}
```

## Memory Impact

Each encryption/decryption operation allocates buffers using a `sync.Pool`. Memory usage per operation:

```
Memory per operation ≈ chunk_size × 2 (read + write buffers)
```

**Examples:**
- 256 KB chunk → ~512 KB per operation
- 1 MB chunk → ~2 MB per operation
- 4 MB chunk → ~8 MB per operation

**Service Mode (Parallel Processing):**
When processing multiple files concurrently:

```
Total memory ≈ chunk_size × 2 × num_workers
```

For 4 workers with 2 MB chunks: ~16 MB total buffer memory.

## File Format Compatibility

**Backward Compatibility:** Files encrypted with different chunk sizes can all be decrypted, as the chunk size is stored in the encrypted file format:

```
[12-byte nonce][4-byte chunk_size][encrypted_chunk]...
```

This means you can:
- Change chunk size between operations
- Decrypt files encrypted with any valid chunk size
- Mix files encrypted with different chunk sizes

**Important:** Once a file is encrypted, its chunk size is fixed. You cannot change it without re-encrypting the file.

## Monitoring and Validation

### Configuration Validation

The application validates chunk size on startup:

```bash
$ ./file-encryptor watch -c config.hcl
ERROR: invalid chunk_size: must be between 64KB and 10MB, got 16MB
```

### Progress Logging

Progress is logged at 20% intervals regardless of chunk size:

```
INFO Encryption progress file=large.bin progress=20.0
INFO Encryption progress file=large.bin progress=40.0
INFO Encryption progress file=large.bin progress=60.0
INFO Encryption progress file=large.bin progress=80.0
INFO Encryption complete file=large.bin
```

With larger chunk sizes, you'll see fewer progress updates for small files.

## Troubleshooting

### Out of Memory Errors

**Symptom:** Application crashes with OOM errors during encryption.

**Solution:** Reduce chunk size:
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "256KB"  # Down from 4MB
}
```

### Slow Performance

**Symptom:** Encryption is slower than expected for large files.

**Solution:** Increase chunk size if memory allows:
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "4MB"  # Up from 1MB
}
```

### Validation Errors

**Symptom:** 
```
ERROR: invalid chunk_size: must be a multiple of 4096 bytes
```

**Solution:** Ensure chunk size is AES-aligned:
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "512KB"  # OK - 524288 is divisible by 4096
  # chunk_size = "500KB"  # FAIL - 512000 not divisible by 4096
}
```

## Benchmarking

To find the optimal chunk size for your environment, use the CLI encrypt command with different sizes:

```bash
# Test 512KB chunks
time ./file-encryptor encrypt -i test.bin -o test1.enc --chunk-size 512KB

# Test 2MB chunks
time ./file-encryptor encrypt -i test.bin -o test2.enc --chunk-size 2MB

# Test 4MB chunks
time ./file-encryptor encrypt -i test.bin -o test3.enc --chunk-size 4MB
```

Compare:
- Total execution time
- Memory usage (use `top` or `htop` during execution)
- CPU utilization

## Best Practices

1. **Start with the default (1MB)** - Good for most use cases
2. **Profile before tuning** - Measure actual performance before changing
3. **Consider memory limits** - Especially in containerized environments
4. **Test with representative files** - Use actual file sizes from your workload
5. **Monitor in production** - Watch for OOM errors or performance issues
6. **Document your choice** - Add comments to your HCL config explaining the chunk size

## Example Configurations

### Cloud Storage Backup
```hcl
# Large files, high throughput required
encryption {
  chunk_size = "4MB"
}
```

### IoT/Edge Device
```hcl
# Limited memory, small files
encryption {
  chunk_size = "128KB"
}
```

### General Server
```hcl
# Balanced default
encryption {
  chunk_size = "1MB"
}
```

### High-Security Archive
```hcl
# Optimized for verification speed
encryption {
  chunk_size = "2MB"
  generate_checksum = true
}
```

## Future Enhancements

**Note:** Auto-tuning based on file size was considered but rejected because:
- Buffer pools are sized at application startup
- Multiple concurrent operations need consistent buffer sizes
- Simpler configuration is more predictable

Instead, choose a chunk size appropriate for your typical file size distribution. If you have widely varying file sizes, choose based on the larger files (as small files complete quickly regardless of chunk size).

Commit message:

Initial commit: Production-ready file encryption with HashiCorp Vault
- Complete envelope encryption system using Vault Transit Engine
- CLI and service (watch) modes for file encryption/decryption
- Key re-wrapping with rewrap and key-versions commands
- Dual Vault support: HCP Vault and Vault Enterprise
- Chunked encryption (1MB chunks) with AES-256-GCM
- Hot-reload configuration support (Unix/Linux/macOS)
- Comprehensive testing (369 tests, 79-96% coverage)
- CI/CD with GitHub Actions and security scanning
- Cross-platform support (Linux, macOS, Windows)

Additional updates:
- Update README and chunk size tuning guide for clarity and accuracy
- Refactor repository structure: update module names and paths to use hyphens instead of underscores
- Update terminology in architecture documentation: replace 'Master Key' with 'Primary Key' for consistency
- Update Vault configuration and certificate common names for consistency and clarity

docs/guides/CHUNK_SIZE_TUNING.md, after:

# Chunk Size Tuning Guide

## Overview

The chunk size determines how much data is encrypted/decrypted in a single AES-GCM operation. This guide helps you choose the optimal chunk size for your use case.

## Default Configuration

**Default Chunk Size:** 1 MB (1048576 bytes)

This default is optimized for general-purpose use and provides a good balance between:
- Memory usage
- CPU efficiency
- File I/O performance
- Progress reporting granularity

## Valid Range

- **Minimum:** 64 KB (65536 bytes)
- **Maximum:** 10 MB (10485760 bytes)

Values must be multiples of 4 KB (4096 bytes) for optimal AES alignment.

## Configuration Methods

### 1. Global Configuration (HCL)

Set the chunk size in your configuration file:

```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "2MB"  # Apply to all operations
}
```

Supported formats:
- `"512KB"` - Kilobytes
- `"2MB"` - Megabytes  
- `"1048576"` - Bytes (no unit)

### 2. CLI Override

Override the configured chunk size for a specific operation:

```bash
# Encrypt with custom chunk size
./file-encryptor encrypt -i large.bin -o large.enc --chunk-size 4MB

# Decrypt uses the chunk size from when the file was encrypted
./file-encryptor decrypt -i large.enc -k large.key -o large.bin
```

**Note:** Decryption automatically reads the chunk size from the encrypted file header, so you don't need to specify it during decryption.

## Performance Characteristics

### Small Chunk Sizes (64KB - 512KB)

**Advantages:**
- Lower memory usage per operation
- More granular progress reporting
- Better for resource-constrained environments
- Faster cancellation response

**Disadvantages:**
- More CPU overhead (more encryption operations)
- More file I/O operations
- Higher metadata overhead
- Slower overall throughput

**Use When:**
- Running on systems with limited RAM
- Processing many small files sequentially
- Need responsive progress updates
- Files are typically small (<10MB)

### Medium Chunk Sizes (512KB - 2MB)

**Advantages:**
- Balanced memory/CPU trade-off
- Good throughput for most file sizes
- Reasonable progress granularity
- Minimal overhead

**Disadvantages:**
- Middle-ground trade-offs

**Use When:**
- General-purpose encryption (default)
- Mixed file sizes
- Standard server/workstation hardware
- Balanced requirements

### Large Chunk Sizes (2MB - 10MB)

**Advantages:**
- Maximum throughput for large files
- Fewer encryption operations
- Lower CPU overhead per byte
- Reduced metadata size

**Disadvantages:**
- Higher memory usage per operation
- Less granular progress reporting
- Slower cancellation response
- Larger buffer pool allocation

**Use When:**
- Processing very large files (>100MB)
- High-performance hardware available
- Throughput is critical
- Memory is not constrained

## Tuning Recommendations

### By File Size

| Average File Size | Recommended Chunk Size |
|------------------|------------------------|
| < 1 MB           | 256 KB                 |
| 1 MB - 10 MB     | 512 KB - 1 MB (default)|
| 10 MB - 100 MB   | 1 MB - 2 MB            |
| 100 MB - 1 GB    | 2 MB - 4 MB            |
| > 1 GB           | 4 MB - 8 MB            |

### By Use Case

**High-Throughput Batch Processing:**
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "4MB"  # Maximize throughput
}
```

**Real-Time Monitoring (Service Mode):**
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "1MB"  # Balanced default
}
```

**Resource-Constrained Environments:**
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "256KB"  # Minimize memory
}
```

**Docker/Container Deployments:**
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "512KB"  # Balance memory limits
}
```

## Memory Impact

Each encryption/decryption operation allocates buffers using a `sync.Pool`. Memory usage per operation:

```
Memory per operation ≈ chunk_size × 2 (read + write buffers)
```

**Examples:**
- 256 KB chunk → ~512 KB per operation
- 1 MB chunk → ~2 MB per operation
- 4 MB chunk → ~8 MB per operation

**Service Mode:**
The service processes files sequentially (one at a time), so memory usage is simply:

```
Total memory ≈ chunk_size × 2
```

For example, with the default 1 MB chunk size, expect approximately 2 MB of buffer memory during file processing.

**Note**: The service uses a single processor that handles one file at a time from the queue. This means chunk size affects the memory footprint for processing each individual file, not concurrent operations.

## File Format Compatibility

**Backward Compatibility:** Files encrypted with different chunk sizes can all be decrypted, as the chunk size is stored in the encrypted file format:

```
[12-byte nonce][4-byte chunk_size][encrypted_chunk]...
```

This means you can:
- Change chunk size between operations
- Decrypt files encrypted with any valid chunk size
- Mix files encrypted with different chunk sizes

**Important:** Once a file is encrypted, its chunk size is fixed. You cannot change it without re-encrypting the file.

## Monitoring and Validation

### Configuration Validation

The application validates chunk size on startup:

```bash
$ ./file-encryptor watch -c config.hcl
ERROR: invalid chunk_size: must be between 64KB and 10MB, got 16MB
```

### Progress Logging

Progress is logged at 20% intervals regardless of chunk size:

```
INFO Encryption progress file=large.bin progress=20.0
INFO Encryption progress file=large.bin progress=40.0
INFO Encryption progress file=large.bin progress=60.0
INFO Encryption progress file=large.bin progress=80.0
INFO Encryption complete file=large.bin
```

With larger chunk sizes, you'll see fewer progress updates for small files.

## Troubleshooting

### Out of Memory Errors

**Symptom:** Application crashes with OOM errors during encryption.

**Solution:** Reduce chunk size:
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "256KB"  # Down from 4MB
}
```

### Slow Performance

**Symptom:** Encryption is slower than expected for large files.

**Solution:** Increase chunk size if memory allows:
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "4MB"  # Up from 1MB
}
```

### Validation Errors

**Symptom:** 
```
ERROR: invalid chunk_size: must be a multiple of 4096 bytes
```

**Solution:** Ensure chunk size is AES-aligned:
```hcl
encryption {
  chunk_size = "512KB"  # OK - 524288 is divisible by 4096
  # chunk_size = "500KB"  # FAIL - 512000 not divisible by 4096
}
```

## Benchmarking

To find the optimal chunk size for your environment, use the CLI encrypt command with different sizes:

```bash
# Test 512KB chunks
time ./file-encryptor encrypt -i test.bin -o test1.enc --chunk-size 512KB

# Test 2MB chunks
time ./file-encryptor encrypt -i test.bin -o test2.enc --chunk-size 2MB

# Test 4MB chunks
time ./file-encryptor encrypt -i test.bin -o test3.enc --chunk-size 4MB
```

Compare:
- Total execution time
- Memory usage (use `top` or `htop` during execution)
- CPU utilization

## Best Practices

1. **Start with the default (1MB)** - Good for most use cases
2. **Profile before tuning** - Measure actual performance before changing
3. **Consider memory limits** - Especially in containerized environments
4. **Test with representative files** - Use actual file sizes from your workload
5. **Monitor in production** - Watch for OOM errors or performance issues
6. **Document your choice** - Add comments to your HCL config explaining the chunk size

## Example Configurations

### Cloud Storage Backup
```hcl
# Large files, high throughput required
encryption {
  chunk_size = "4MB"
}
```

### IoT/Edge Device
```hcl
# Limited memory, small files
encryption {
  chunk_size = "128KB"
}
```

### General Server
```hcl
# Balanced default
encryption {
  chunk_size = "1MB"
}
```

### High-Security Archive
```hcl
# Optimized for verification speed
encryption {
  chunk_size = "2MB"
  generate_checksum = true
}
```
